---
title: Perceived Advantages of Writing the Specification first
tags: 
  - bdd
  - specification
  - opinion
  - mocks 
  - stubs
  - philosophy
  - long
---

I will try to summarize some of the perceived advantages of writing
specifications first. The word 'perceived' indicates that I don't mean to say
that the ideas presented here are hard facts. Rather, they are based on the
anecdotal evidence of my senses and my experience. I'll talk about

* How Specs are documentation (_this post_)
* How testable code has clean interfaces
* How testing forces you to think

h2. Specs are the documentation

If you apply some sort of quality control on your specifications, they will be
readable. They should also reflect what you or (to a varying degree) your
customer expect from the code. That said: Look at your specs as the only up to
date documentation for the code.

Having those specs makes your situation a lot better than having only the
code. While you can't refactor code and keep it at the same time (for
documentation purposes on what you already have), you _can_ refactor code and
keep the specifications.

Specs encode all the choices you've made during writing code. People that
don't write specs have also made these same choices. _But only mentally_. And
then forgotten about it before lunch. It doesn't feel differently, the code
commits might even be exactly the same. Except, some time later, you (the guy
who does "BDD":http://rspec.info) will still have a record of what you thought
of (or didn't) when writing the code.

I had to maintain code that looked like this once: 

<pre class="sh_java"><code>
public int someFunction(int p1, int p2) {
  // Some code 
  // Some more code
  
  if (p2 == 23) { // (1)
    return -1;
  }
  
  // Other code
}
</code></pre>

The above snippet is anonymized to protect the innocent. The comment at (1)
said something like 'this is a special case' or 'I've had to introduce this,
otherwise it wouldn't work'. While I appreciate the comment, it doesn't help
at all.

My task was to clean up this piece of code and to rewrite some of it. As it
happens, no tests/specs were available, making that thin comment everything I
could hang myself on. In situations like these, you have two choices: Delete
the whole exception and wait for things to break or leave it in and hope
someone else breaks it later. Either way, this is a liability that waits to
bite you the next time around. Having to remember a functions with a positive
image may return a special negative value that indicates mystery going on
makes reasoning about the system a complex task.

It would have been an altogether different matter if I had had specifications
like these:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
describe "someFunction" do
  it "should return -1 (exceptionally) when flab hits the fob" do
    obj.someFunction(1, 2).should == -1
  end
end
</code></pre>

In that case, I might have left the code as it was. There's a clear reason
for why this ugly snippet has come to be. And I even have a choice: I let it
stand as it is (for working code can't be all bad) or I rip it out with some
confidence in what I am doing. 

There's a
"guy":http://www.ted.com/talks/bill_stone_explores_the_earth_and_space.html
who wants to fly to the moon without the fuel to get back. My job isn't like
that. I want to be able to go back and revise my choices. That's why I write
them down.
