---
title: One-Way RPC using AMQP as transport and THRIFT for communication
tags: 
  - amqp
  - thrift
  - ruby
  - queue
  - rpc
---

In this article I would like to present '"thrift_amqp_transport":http://github.com/kschiess/thrift_amqp_transport', 
a small library I've worked on in the past months. It allows you to do 
one way rpc (method calls) using AMQP as a transport layer. This will decouple
the sender from the receiver completely. I will present some usage examples 
in the second part of this article. 

What is AMQP? Igvita.com has recently featured a nice "overview
article":http://www.igvita.com/2009/10/08/advanced-messaging-routing-with-amqp/
about AMQP and Ruby. AMQP is a protocol for asynchronous messaging/ queuing
over the network.

Thrift ("also on
igvita.com":http://www.igvita.com/2007/11/30/ruby-web-services-with-facebooks-thrift/)
is an RPC framework developed by Facebook (formerly) that got made an Apache
project. It allows you to do cross language/ cross platform method calls. I am
impressed by the clean design that went into this. The intermediary definition
language that is used is surprisingly rich, allows you to aggregate data into
types and to transmit hashes and lists.

h2. A very basic example of AMQP usage

Your rails application wants to create directories on demand. Using AMQP, you
can queue up new directories to be created like this: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  require 'bunny'

  Bunny.start do |connection|
    work_queue = connection.queue('work')

    work_queue.publish('create_directory foo')
  end
</code></pre>

A small sample worker might look like this: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  require 'bunny'

  Bunny.start do |connection|
    work_queue = connection.queue('work')

    work = work_queue.pop

    unless work.payload == :queue_empty
      command, *args = work.payload.split

      # Execute the command 
      case command
        when 'create_directory'
          puts "Create directory #{args.first}"
      end
    else
      puts "No work to do."
    end
  end
</code></pre>

As you can see, any non-trivial use will implement some form of RPC-mechanism.
(even this trivial example does) As long as you're not transmitting only data, 
but want to act on that data, you will implement some kind of dispatch 
mechanism on the other end. 

h2. RPC instead of strings

To avoid writing a complex dispatch mechanism, it would probably be wise to
use some kind of RPC implementation to reduce complexity at this point. Using
'<code>thrift_amqp_transport</code>', the above code would look like this:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  require 'thrift_amqp_transport'
  
  # Yes, its more setup code.
  connection = Thrift::AMQP::Connection.start
  transport = connection.client_transport('work_rpc')
  protocol = Thrift::BinaryProtocol.new(transport)
  client = MyService::Client.new(protocol)

  client.createDirectory('foo')
</code></pre>

This layers thrift binary messages atop the 'work_rpc' queue on your AMQP
host. To your AMQP server, this looks like just another message. To receive
work and do something, you would write this code:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  require 'thrift_amqp_transport'
  
  class MyServiceHandler
    def createDirectory(name)
      puts "Creating #{name}"
    end
  end
  
  connection = Thrift::AMQP::Connection.start
  handler = MyServiceHandler.new()
  processor = MyService::Processor.new(handler)
  server_transport = connection.server_transport('work_rpc')

  server = Thrift::SimpleServer.new(processor, transport)
  server.serve    # never returns
</code></pre>

As you can see, dispatching has completely gone from the code. You can now
extend the service without rewriting any dispatcher/parser code, using 
thrift's rich set of intermediate types in your method calls. 

You might be wondering where all those new classes
(<code>MyService::Processor, MyService::Client, ...</code>) suddenly come
from. Those are generated by thrift, starting from the service definition,
which would look like this in our case:

<pre><code>
  service MyService {
    oneway void createDirectory(1:string name);
  }
</code></pre>

h2. Some possible past&future uses of this

I am using this for queuing up work and acting on it like you can see in the
example above. This is probably more complex (setup-wise) than other solutions, but allows me to restart workers at any time, since the work is 
stored on the queue in a persistent manner. 

But of course, with the power of thrift and AMQP under the 
hood, some other uses become possible: 

h3. Round Robin Load Balancing

The library might offer the possibility to acknowledge a message once the 
work is done. This would allow you to push work on the queue and get some
guarantees that its really becoming acted upon. If a worker pops a work item
and doesn't acknowledge it, most AMQP implementations should redeliver the
work item at one of the next <code>pop</code>s. (to the next worker)

h3. Service Discovery (one to many broadcast)

With the current state of the code, you could already have a service broadcast
its presence on the network, updating it with heartbeats. 

h3. Two-Way Messaging

I would be interested in extending this library to allow two-way messaging. 

h1. Status & Limitations

The library is under active development and will be extended in the future. 
Some of the above uses are not yet possible, patches are welcome. 

You can get the source code "here":http://github.com/kschiess/thrift_amqp_transport.
