---
title: Projects, Projects, Projects... 
tags: 
  - snafu
  - apple
  - microsoft
  - mail
  - picky
  - parslet
---

Usually when you don't hear from me here, I am really busy. The policy until 
now has been not to write about that; but there I went and cracked. 

h2. parslet

I've discovered that the parser library I've written during my brief excursion 
(that is to be repeated) into the world of compiler writing is valuable on
its own. In fact, its probably even more valuable than any of the things I 
did with the compiler. That's just the way these projects go. 

I've thrown together a small "website":http://kschiess.github.com/parslet for
the project and am working towards an 1.0 release. Encouragements, comments,
... are welcome!

h2. picky

On a related note, I've been loosely involved in helping to get
"picky":http://floere.github.com/picky/index.html ready for a 1.0 release as
well. Picky is a search engine for categorized data, data that is organized in
small fields. Like .. for example a database. But who has one of those, right?

h2. Apple Mail woes

At work I was trying to get Apple Mail and Thunderbird to autoconfigure
email. My goal was to have the user enter 'john.doe@example.com' and figure
out the rest by looking at our LDAP database.

And I got it working. At least for Thunderbird which has a "documented
API":https://wiki.mozilla.org/Thunderbird:Autoconfiguration and for Microsoft
Outlook, which also has an
"API":http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc511507.aspx. Yeah, you read
right. _Microsoft Outlook_. That didn't go according to plan.

Apple Mail does two things for autodiscovery behind the scenes. 

# It _phones home_ (apple.com) getting a binary answer that is AFAIK not
  documented. Try with 'something@gmail.com'.
# It pretends to speak Microsoft and _doesn't honor the answer_. It posts the
  same autodiscovery XML request as Outlook does. Somehow I failed to get it
  working with the same answer that Outlook accepts. *So there*.
  
You probably got by now that this is a tale of FAIL. Indeed I posted to 
"stackoverflow":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4245828/implementing-settings-autodiscovery-for-apple-mail about this, but can I really expect an answer to that? Universe? 
Surprise me!.

