---
title: Introducing Cod
tags: 
  - zeromq
  - cod
  - ruby
  - beanstalk
  - pipes
  - library
---

"Cod":http://www.google.com/search?q=cod&tbm=isch is a library for
interprocess communication that I am working on in the wee hours these days.
My goal is to make things really simple and to overlay sockets, pipes and
other means of communication with an interface that is easy to remember.

Cod is open source software and will be released sometime this year. In the
meantime, please look at
"github.com/kschiess/cod":https://github.com/kschiess/cod to get an idea. Try
it out and send me feedback!

h2. Building on small elements

One of the main ideas of parslet was to build on small elements and to
construct larger ideas from them. This style of construction pervades my work
and never gets old for me. In Cod, I am trying to achieve much the same. All
work you do with it will be based on the concept of a unidirectional
communication channel:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  channel = Cod.pipe
</code></pre>

This is a channel based on <code>IO.pipe</code>. It abstracts all the nitty
gritty for you. Here's how you communicate with child processes: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  control = Cod.pipe
  
  pid = fork do
    loop do
      # do something important & interesting
      break if control.waiting? && control.get == :shutdown
    end
  end
  
  # eventually, deciding that we want to shut down the child: 
  control.put :shutdown
  
  Process.waitall
</code></pre>

As you can see in the above sample, Cod defaults to serializing Ruby objects
through channels. This will be open for customization later on, but is mostly
what you'll want anyway. 

For now, you are forced to ask if messages are queued up
(<code>control.waiting?</code>) - however I will be working on allowing a
Cod.select as well, implementing mixed #select calls on real FDs and Cod
channels. This is real important for the style of process design I am aiming
for. 

h2. Channels in channels

Cod channels try to be serializable. This sounds trivial, but has really 
profound implications. Let's say you want to create a client/server type of 
interaction: You will have a common server address and open up a channel to 
it. But to be able to get a response back, you will need two things: 

* A channel to receive answers in
* and to be able to communicate the channel to the server. 

Here's how you would probably do this in Cod:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  server = Cod.beanstalk('somehost:11300', 'server')
  client = Cod.beanstalk('somehost:11300')
  
  server.put ['heiho server!', client]
  answer = client.get
</code></pre>

And on the server side of this: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  comm = Cod.beanstalk('somehost:11300', 'server')
  
  message, client = comm.get
  answer = act_on(message)
  client.put answer
</code></pre>

But of course, in real life this is slightly more complex. You will want to
use <code>Cod::Client</code> and <code>Cod::Service</code> for this kind of
interaction; it bundles this functionality and delivers a debugged and robust
implementation. 

h2. Bleeding edge

The above code will not even work. I am illustrating the idea, see. But it 
might very soon. Have a look at <code>./examples</code> - those typically 
work. For now, assume that nothing else does.

h2. Patterns of distributed computing

Cod will: Capture and encode patterns of distributed computation/communication
in a library that allows the programmer to focus on the level above. To allow
communication (even cross-communication?) with the newest fad queue server X,
you'll write a channel implementation for X and then profit of all higher
order primitives directly.

Nifty. Been chuckling about the simplicity of it for days now. (Insert thunder
& lightning)