---
title: Stack Traces in Parslet
tags: 
  - stacktrace
  - parslet
  - parser
  - error reporting
  - design
---

I get a lot of interesting puzzles from users of
"parslet":http://github.com/kschiess/parslet. You think you're asking me about
a feature, but generally, if you have to ask, I haven't yet written about it
in "parslets documentation":http://kschiess.github.com/parslet/. And I usually
need to, since it is obviously an issue. 

This post treats why parslet doesn't do any compilation; or rather: why parslet
doesn't need to do any compilation.

h2. Why the compilation phase?

One of the reasons other parser frameworks ('generators') generate parser code
for you is that when the parse fails, the exception will contain a stack trace
useful to you. Let's look at a small sample in the
"Treetop":http://treetop.rubyforge.org/ dialect:

<pre class="sh_sourceCode"><code>
  grammar Simple
    rule addition
      integer (plus integer)*
    end

    rule plus
      '+' space?
    end

    rule integer
      [0-9]+ space?
    end

    rule space
      ' '+
    end
  end
</code></pre>

When you apply this to the text '<code>1 ++ 2</code>', Treetop returns
<code>nil</code> and inspection of the associated failure reason yields this
error message:

bq. Expected   at line 1, column 3 (byte 3) after +

This means that Treetop has been expecting a ' ' (space) at byte 3, but saw a
'+' (plus). What Treetop could do (but doesn't currently) at this point is
raise an exception at the exact place the parse fails. I've inserted the 
above error message as 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
fail "Expected   at line 1, column 3 (byte 3) after +"
</code></pre>

at the location the parse fails. This gets me the following stack trace: 

<pre class="sh_sourceCode"><code>
(...)/simple.rb:202:in `block in _nt_space': Expected   at line 1, column 3 (byte 3) after + (RuntimeError)
  from (...)/simple.rb:197:in `loop'
  from (...)/simple.rb:197:in `_nt_space'
  from (...)/simple.rb:164:in `_nt_integer'
  from (...)/simple.rb:41:in `_nt_addition'
  from (...)/treetop-1.4.9/lib/treetop/runtime/compiled_parser.rb:18:in `parse'
  from driver.rb:8:in `<main>'
</code></pre>

Since Treetop compiles your grammar down to ruby, the stack trace contains all
rules as method names and indicates where in your grammar you might collide 
with the input provided. So *the stack trace is for debugging*. Or rather it
could be, if <code>#terminal_parse_failure</code> in Treetop is overridden
to raise an error. 

h2. Limitations

The stack trace reflects the state of the call stack when the error happens.
This stack is linear, and so must be the stack trace. But PEG parsing isn't
linear: you might encounter an alternative ('<code>a|b</code>') and ultimately
fail in '<code>b</code>' because neither one matches.

Let's assume that '<code>a</code>' should have matched the input and contains
an imperfection. We'll be interested in all the reasons '<code>a</code>'
didn't match the input. _But the stack trace will show only why
'<code>b</code>' didn't match_, since it was tried last.

A linear stack trace will never capture why a grammar didn't consume a
particular input. If we could design the ideal kind of error message, we would
try to *include all alternatives* that have failed.

What else would we wish for? There is one last property of stack traces that 
renders them unsuited for parser error reports: They capture the whole history
of that process. If you give Treetop a rule like this one: 

<pre class="sh_sourceCode"><code>
  rule rec
    '.' rec / ''
  end
</code></pre>

which matches any number of '.'s (dots), your stack trace will grow with the
number of dots in the input. Yet all those recursive calls wont add to the
informational content of the error report. All that it will say is that you
were expecting a dot, but got something else. Ideally, this report should only
show that the rule 'rec' failed, and what it encountered instead of a dot. *It
should not repeat*.

h2. Not Stack Traces, Error Trees

The error reports "parslet":http://kschiess.github.com/parslet generates have
both properties we've seen above. They preserve all relevant error
information, not just the last alternative matched, and they never show all
levels of recursion.

Here's how that might look (taken from 
"Getting Started":http://kschiess.github.com/parslet/getting_started.html): 

<pre class="sh_sourceCode"><code>
  Parsing 1++2: Don't know what to do with ++2 at line 1 char 2.
  `- Unknown error in SUM / INTEGER
     |- Failed to match sequence (INTEGER OPERATOR EXPRESSION) at line 1 char 3.
     |  `- Unknown error in [0-9]{1, } SPACE?
     |     `- Expected at least 1 of \\s at line 1 char 2.
     |        `- Failed to match \\s at line 1 char 3.
     `- Unknown error in [0-9]{1, } SPACE?
        `- Expected at least 1 of \\s at line 1 char 2.
           `- Failed to match \\s at line 1 char 3.
</code></pre>

This illustrates both accounts very well: 

* The alternative <code>SUM / INTEGER</code> produces two error reports, 
  from left to right. The ascii tree helps reading these reports. 
* All parts are readable and refer our grammar directly. Line
  numbers cease to mean much when we're dealing with PEGs. 

h2. And beyond

There are many more cool parts to parslet; I suggest you check it out. The
upcoming 1.1 release will improve execution speed vastly; of course it
also features the cool error reports you've just been shown. 

It also features tree transformations to be able to act on your grammar, but
that is a topic for another post. 