---
title: Parslet Tree Mangling and Transformations
tags: 
  - parslet
  - transformations
  - tree
  - PORO
---

A simple parser in "parslet":http://kschiess.github.com/parslet will at first
only output strings from its parsing stage:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  class SimpleParser < Parslet::Parser
    root :ifthenelse

    rule(:ifthenelse) {
      _if >> _then >> _else.maybe
    }

    rule(:_if)    { str('if') >> space? >> number }
    rule(:_then)  { str('then') >> space? >> number }
    rule(:_else)  { str('else') >> space? >> number }

    rule(:number) { match["0-9"].repeat(1) >> space? }

    rule(:space?) { match["\s"].repeat }
  end
  
  SimpleParser.new.parse(%Q(if 1 then 2 else 3))
  # => "if 1 then 2 else 3"@0
</code></pre>

This means that a match has been found at input position 0. That's all the
information you can get from this. But what if this is not enough? 

You add tags. Let's say, we want to know what numbers are in the if, then and
else branch, respectively. It would only be natural to assume that tagging 
number like this: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  ...
  rule(:number) { match["0-9"].repeat(1).as(:number) >> space? }
  ...
</code></pre>

would be enough. And it is, in a way: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  SimpleParser.new.number.parse('123')  # => {:number=>"123"@0}
</code></pre>

So you launch the full example (without extracting the number parser) and you
get this: 

<pre class="sh_bash"><code>
  > ruby simple.rb
  Duplicate subtrees while merging result of 
    IFTHENELSE
  only the values of the latter will be kept. (keys: [:number])
  Duplicate subtrees while merging result of 
    IFTHENELSE
  only the values of the latter will be kept. (keys: [:number])
  {:number=>"3"@17}
</code></pre>

The warnings that parslet outputs can be shut up with <code>-W0</code> on the
command line, but the result is hardly what we expect. (what about 1 and 2?)
So the warnings probably mean something. To explain this, I'd like to dive
into what parslet does with the output from its parsing stages (also called
atoms).

h2. Output Merging Algorithm (Handwaving Version)

Let's consider a parser that has no tags (<code>.as(...)</code>) in it. The
two basic atoms of such a parser will have strings as output: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  str('a').parse('a')   # => "a"@0
  match['a'].parse('a') # => "a"@0
</code></pre>

This is always the case. As shown above, the entire parser will have the 
input string as output. Here are the stages such an input string goes through
before being returned to you: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  parser = str('a') >> str('b') >> str('c')
  input  = 'abc'

  # Stage 1: Sequence matching result (yes, a Ruby Array)
  ["a"@0, "b"@1, "c"@2]
  
  # Stage 2: Merging ajacent strings
  "abc"@0
</code></pre>

From this, we'll deduce *merge rule #1*: _Elements of a sequence or a
repetition match are concatenated if they're strings._ This rule is enough to
explain the first result we had above where our <code>:ifthenelse</code> rule
would return the string we fed into it.

Let's inspect what happens when we start tagging. The most interesting case is
partial tagging, since that is what occurs most often in real life. The things
we parse contain delimiters that are not signal, but syntactic noise: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  parser = str('a') >> str('b').as(:important) >> str('c')
  
  # Stage 1: Basic matching
  ["a"@0, {:important => "b"@1}, "c"@2]
    
  # Stage 2: Merge
  {:important=>"b"@1}
</code></pre>

Here's *rule #2*: _In mixed sequences and repetitions, hashes (tagged
elements) and arrays (collections of tagged elements) are retained._

Now to add a last element, let's also look at how multiple tags are handled: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  parser = str('a') >> str('b').as(:b) >> str('c').as(:c)
  
  # Stage 1: Basic matching
  ["a"@0, {:b=>"b"@1}, {:c=>"c"@2}]
  
  # Stage 2: Merge
  {:b=>"b"@1, :c=>"c"@2}
</code></pre>

And here's *rule #3*: _In sequences, hashes mean a named subtree. As such, the
branches are merged into one hash._

h2. Why the "Duplicate subtrees" Message?

We now have enough rules for figuring out what the message

<pre class="sh_bash"><code>
  Duplicate subtrees while merging result of 
    IFTHENELSE
  only the values of the latter will be kept. (keys: [:number])
</code></pre>

means. Each of the parser atoms <code>:_if</code>, <code>:_then</code> and
<code>:_else</code> essentially output <code>{:number => X}</code>. (#2) Those
are then merged together into one hash. (#3) Since all of them have a single
key <code>:number</code>, parslet cannot merge them together without
discarding information. As output we get 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  {:number=>"3"@17}
  # result of 
  {:number=>"1"@3}.merge({:number=>"2"@10}).merge({:number=>"3"@17})
</code></pre>

h2. How to fix this

To fix this, you will need to provide parslet with more information on how
to arrange the information: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  class SimpleParser < Parslet::Parser
    # ...
    rule(:_if)    { str('if') >> space? >> number.as(:cond) }
    rule(:_then)  { str('then') >> space? >> number.as(:then) }
    rule(:_else)  { str('else') >> space? >> number.as(:else) }
    # ...
  end
  
  SimpleParser.new.parse(%Q(if 1 then 2 else 3))
  # => {:cond=>{:number=>"1"@3}, :then=>{:number=>"2"@10}, :else=>{:number=>"3"@17}}
</code></pre>

Results are still merged together, but this time the keys are all distinct.
Hence no warning and no discarded information. 

h2. And Transformation

Let's consider transforming this into something useful:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  class SimpleTransform < Parslet::Transform
    rule(:number => simple(:n)) { Integer(n) }

    rule(
      :cond => simple(:c), 
      :then => simple(:t), 
      :else => simple(:e)) { [c, t, e] }
  end
  
  SimpleTransform.new.apply(SimpleParser.new.parse(%Q(if 1 then 2 else 3)))
  # => [1, 2, 3]
</code></pre>

As you can see, a first rule transforms all <code>:numbers</code> into real
Ruby numbers in one single step. A second rule then uses the semantic tags to
reorder the information in the tree into a simple triplet of [COND, THEN,
ELSE].

This shows that both levels of tags (<code>:numbers</code> and
<code>:if/:then/:else</code>) are needed and useful. 

Careful readers will have noticed that the above Transformer is missing a 
rule for the case where 'else' is missing. Here's the full Transformer: 

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>
  class SimpleTransform < Parslet::Transform
    rule(:number => simple(:n)) { Integer(n) }

    rule(
      :cond => simple(:c), 
      :then => simple(:t), 
      :else => simple(:e)) { [c, t, e] }
    rule(
      :cond => simple(:c), 
      :then => simple(:t)) { [c, t, nil] }
  end
  
  SimpleTransform.new.apply(SimpleParser.new.parse(%Q(if 1 then 2)))
  # => [1, 2, nil]
</code></pre>

Due to the nature of the transformers in parslet the case distinction gets
folded into multiple pattern matching rules. This is supposed to remind
you of functional programming - Duplication is a good thing, at least here. 

h2. Wrapping it up

I've tried to show you some of the more technical aspects of parsing and
transformation. We've seen how parser output gets mangled to throw away
all those strings parslet deems unimportant to you. With the three rules given
above, you will be able to reason about this stage.

Also, I hope to inspire a 'more is more' approach in connection with
transformer rules. Rule actions should not handle case distinctions; a
properly encoded tree will contain enough variety to be able to match
different cases directly. It goes without saying that the code in these blocks
should be kept short, since some of it will be repeated.